well Israel is a Jewish state but it's
also home to a mixed population that
includes about 20% ethnic Arabs many of
whom identify as Palestinians and they
often face discrimination with tensions
in the region once again flaring one
group of activists in Israel is trying
to promote solidarity across ethnic
lines DW's a Ibrahim reports tonight
from
hia a sight to
behold this room contains right
now Palestinians and Jews who actually
in the darkest most
polarizing most
difficult moment in the history of the
two peoples right now is choosing to
like actually work
together they want to send a message
they feel cannot be repeated enough
millions of Palestinians will remain
here and millions of Jewish people will
remain here and that's a fact this
meeting at AOS and hia is organized by
standing together a Grassroots peace
movement made up of Jewish and
Palestinian citizens of
Israel activists tell me such
togetherness has been rare since the
October 7th Hamas
attacks and that often demonstrations of
solidarity in either direction are met
with rejection we have friends we have
neighbors we have peers we have
colleagues who are Jewish who got deeply
impacted by this and and we we were
devastated um but by the
ATT uh but even that was not something
that was fully accepted by a lot of the
Jewish public oh you're hurting for us
now but so you can't say you can't
identify as Palestinian we do suffer
from
um calls for violence from being called
being a traitor from inment against us
Jewish people that are working towards
peace that are working to build
solidarity um among Jews and
Palestinians the fact that we are even
unable to fully experience and grief our
people
um
is is like the it's like the the epitome
of our psychosis and our
experience as Palestinians in Israel
like I'm literally unable to fully grief
my
people while also like like you're like
on a mission to convince people you're
human
like
[Music]
um people here believe deepening
divisions in Israeli Society make it all
the more important to meet and to show
empathy with one
another so they put that empathy quite
literally
center
stage in defiance of local right-wing
groups which tried to get the event
cancelled it's happening under tight
security it's more than just talk though
volunteers visit places where Muslims
and Jews work together like this
hospital near hia they handed out thank
you cards to staff written in Arabic and
Hebrew
Tamara assadi is a Palestinian Israeli
teacher who works at a predominantly
Jewish
school it is important for me to be a
role model for my students for my
country and everyone around
me the visit is happening 1 month after
the October 7th terror attack it's so
important to Mark to remark the fact
that we are together in the staff here
and many other places we are doing very
very
naturally together togetherness
naturally togetherness what about jewi
people like yourself back at the
assembly I ask Alan Lee green if he
feels their movement speaks for the
majority in Israeli Society no but do
all the society the majority of society
have the interest of the direction we
want to go I think the answer is
yes after the speeches attendees break
up into small groups
they brainstorm more practical ways they
might spread their message and to
convince more of their fellow Israelis
to see each other the way they
do an inspiring story there my first
guest tonight is Omar bartov he's a
professor of Holocaust and genocide
studies at Brown University and the
author of numerous books on war genocide
and anti-Semitism he has written on how
the memory of the Holocaust informs
contemporary Israeli politics in an
opinion piece for the New York Times
last week entitled what I believe as a
historian of genocide Mr bov wrote that
we know from history that it is crucial
to warn of the potential for genocide
before it occurs rather than belatedly
condemn it after it has taken place I
think we still have that
time Mr bov joins me tonight from
Cambridge Massachusetts in the US it's
good to have you with us Mr bartov um
you obviously Advocate a proactive
approach stop genocide before it starts
do you see the Genesis of genocide in
Gaza right
now uh yes thank you for having me um
yes I think that we are very close
to um a a humanitarian catastrophe we
may be seeing ethnic cleansing as we
speak and that combined with the massive
disproportionate uh killing of civilians
may become
genocide you also write that the urge to
label all atrocious events as genocide
tends to
obfuscate reality rather than explain it
so this urge is that what we are seeing
in these Mass protests here in Europe
and on University campuses in the United
States a a rush to to judge or label
something before the crime has been
committed yes that's true that's the
other problem with um with the term
genocide you know this term was uh uh
coined in the in the mid-40s and then
became part of a UN resolution in 1948
and it's a very specific crime and um on
the one hand it is important to as you
cited me writing it's important to warn
about the potential of genocide before
it happens because after it happens it's
obviously too late but at the same time
there's a tendency because this is
considered to be the crime of crimes the
worst crime one can imagine uh to label
anything that is atrocious that is
terrible that we object to uh as
genocide and I think that tends to
obfuscate things rather than to clarify
them I I understand that the the legal
or the academic definition of genocide I
understand that those are important but
um one could say or ask does it matter I
mean the legal definitions they mean
little when the images of human
suffering on a tremendous scale tell us
that seeing is believing what do you say
to
that I think it does matter you know I
mean in war um many words uh civilians
uh are killed and there's a great amount
amount of suffering if you think for
instance uh during the um during World
War II uh the massive bombing of Germany
in which hundreds of thousands of
Civilian uh German civilians were killed
um that was a war against Nazi Germany
uh Nazi Germany was carrying out a
genocide the United States and Britain
uh that were conducting strategic
bombing which might have been defined
subsequently was not but could have been
as war crimes were're not engaged in
genocide so when you show images as such
um and images of suffering people you
need to contextualize them to know what
how to distinguish between one event and
another it's also important simply
because we need to know if we are
sliding toward that event toward
genocide crimes against humanity war
crimes ethnic cleansing or not and
showing those images on on their own is
not sufficient to make that
determination you know being able to
contextualize anything it requires um
patience time and also a knowledge of
History do you think in our social media
world that we live in right now um a
news uh um clock that is on
247 do we have those U qualities
today well no obviously not I what we
are seeing you know still going back to
the war the Russian invasion of Ukraine
and now the war in Gaza um you find that
people um have short memories they
haven't studied history and they are
dependent a great deal on social media
which not only gives them only only tiny
little segments of information but often
keeps them in a bubble of the kind of
information that they want to hear uh
and and that unfortunately doesn't help
us know how to act in any given
situation I'm sure you're aware that um
Germany has pledged full support for
Israel the German Chancellor Olaf
Schultz he repeated that pledge today
take a listen to what he
said Israel has every right to defend
itself against Hamas and to attack those
who are active as Hamas fighters in
Gaza it's unaccept that Hamas should
again have the opportunity to
reestablish itself gather weapons and
attack
Israel and that's why we are clear on
this issue and stand by Israel's
side Mr bov when you hear those words no
consider that and consider the people
that I've spoken with this week I spoke
yesterday with the author Nathan thr he
and the german-american author Deborah
Feldman they both put forth the
observation that Germany's commitment to
isra isra's survival and security leaves
no room for any criticism of Israel's
government and its policies in fact in
Germany often criticism of the Israeli
state is tantamount to
anti-Semitism what are your thoughts
about
that look I mean I I grew up in Israel I
I grew up surrounded by holoc survivors
I became a German historian and I saw
how Germany shifted uh in the 1980s from
um generally denying any individual
responsibility or even Collective
responsibility for the Holocaust to
creating this Memorial culture which is
very important so um from that
perspective and also as an Israeli I can
say I agree with what the chancellor
says as far as uh Israel right in fact
duty to defend itself and its citizens
that is not the question and I think
it's very nice that the chancellor says
that but Germany is a very powerful
country and big player on the European
scene and defending yourself from
atrocity responding to atrocity doesn't
mean that you should do it yourself and
here I think Germany could play an
important role first of all in pointing
out that Israel is is engaging now in
what probably looks like uh war crimes
um so that's that's the to me a
important point it's true that there is
now a culture in Germany where it is
very difficult to criticize Israel
without being accused of anti-Semitism
I've encountered that myself in Germany
in the United States I think that's
nonsense of course I mean you should be
able to criticize a country's policies
without uh doubting its right to exist
which of course Israel has like any
other country but Mr BR do you really
think that it's realistic for a a German
Chancellor or a German government to go
public with with that statement that we
support Israel but we think what the
government doing right now um could
constitute a war crime do you think that
Germany would really ever ever dare to
say
that I think it will I mean I think
there's actually a growing shift in
public opinion in Germany which is not
yet reflected in its a political in many
ways also intellectual Elites but I
think we're seeing that shift in Germany
we're seeing that shift in the United
States a younger generation is coming to
the for and they're much more critical
of Israel I I actually worry that um
this will create a sort of backlash
against Israel which I would not like to
see I I would like to see um um
realistic criticism of Israeli policies
at the same time I would like that to
influence Israel to change his policies
so that he would not be subjected to
this right now just
criticism do you think Germany's
approach to this rise in
anti-Semitism is the right approach we
got we've seen some pro- Palestinian
demonstrations for example they have
been banned due to fears of anti-jewish
and pro-islamist strains being given a
public platform do you think that's the
right
approach no I think it's excessive and
and there's also a tendency in Germany
not only in Germany to to
associate um uh demonstrations against
Israeli policies with the Arab or Muslim
uh elements in society which which
actually ties in with all kind of
prejudices in in German society as in
other European societies there is a a
Neo-Nazi a powerful right-wing Neo-Nazi
movement in Germany right now and
they're about as anti-semitic as anybody
can be so in some ways this focus on
that part of society reflects prejudices
in German society which are camouflaged
by a a um sort of support for Israel uh
so no I I don't think it's the right
approach of course Germany and all other
countries should uh respond to
anti-Semitism uh anti-Semitism is a vile
sentiment but not all criticism is
anti-Semitic on social media we see lots
of people talking about the just the
sheer number of people who seem to be
moved by what is happening in Gaza and
Israel and they posed the question why
were there no Mass demonstrations when
Bashar al-assad's regime was killing
countless civilians during the Civil War
there why were there no protest or why
are there no protest against the Iranian
regime and its treatment of women W with
that in mind do you think that it's
possible that there is too much Focus or
even a
fetishization of the Israeli Palestinian
conflict possibly even you know how it
pertains to
genocide look there is I mean it's a
it's a complicated uh history right I
mean Israel was created right after the
Holocaust so there is
uh in Europe in the United States a a
particular attitude toward Israel both a
sensibility to its safety and um sort of
sensibility to what it does when it does
something wrong uh but Israel also has
presented itself always as the only
democracy in the Middle East and so if
it wants to be part and it was moving
toward becoming part really of Europe uh
it wants to be part of that Universe it
has to be measured by different
standards than the the the tyrannical
regime of Bashar al-assad or of the
Iranian regime we don't expect much of
those regimes but we do from Israel
because it presents itself as such and
it should I think it's it's the right
thing but then you have to be also
willing to be subjected to a different
set of standards and criteria as to the
way you behave Mr Omar B we appreciate
you taking the time to talk with us
tonight very enlightening discussion
thank you we hope you come back have a
good evening thank thank you very much
good
evening